A leftist meltdown of hypocrisy and scandal
Democrats exposed as rank hypocrites, grifters, not-so closeted Marxists

Democrat elites are coming apart at the seams, but the media are still playing cover-up. So, here’s a brief rundown. 

President Biden’s ratings are so low that analysts are wearing miner’s hats to get down to the point on the graph where people “approve” his leadership. Perhaps the vast, “disapproving” majority don’t like $3.50 a gallon gas and paying four bucks for a can of Spam. 

Maybe it’s the empty shelves, drag queens in uniform and unconstitutional COVID-19 shot mandates, now being primed for 6-month-old babies. Maybe it’s the homicidal crime wave in Democrat-run cities where Mr. Biden’s pal George Soros bought prosecutors who prefer criminals over the police. Maybe it’s homeless tents taking over huge areas in the same cities, spawning crime and hazardous health conditions.

Maybe it’s seeing drug dealers and violent criminals pour over our southern border while taxpayers fund secret flights of thousands of illegal aliens all over the country. This, while Mr. Biden is sending U.S. troops to defend Ukraine’s border — not ours.

No matter where you look, the Democrat elites are being exposed as rank hypocrites, grifters and, in some cases, not-so closeted Marxists. 

Peter Schweizer’s new book “Red Handed: How American Elites Get Rich Helping China Win,” reveals the Biden family’s extensive business dealings with Chinese communist companies. How can Mr. Biden hold China accountable for anything?

At the Supreme Court, Democrats are assailing Justice Clarence Thomas’ wife Ginni’s conservative activism as a “conflict of interest.” They saw no conflict when Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Elena Kagan failed to recuse themselves from the Obergefell v. Hodges same-sex marriage case even though both justices had themselves officiated same-sex marriage rites. 

Meanwhile, longtime liberal Justice Stephen G. Breyer has been forced to retire so Mr. Biden can appoint a younger leftist. Mr. Biden’s vow that no one but a Black woman will be nominated would have gotten any business or college hauled into court. 

Mr. Biden wants the Senate to get rid of the filibuster. In 2005, then-Sen. Biden defended the filibuster, warning Republicans not to end it. For two years, he filibustered the nomination of California Supreme Court Justice Janice Rogers Brown, an eminently qualified conservative Black woman, to a federal appeals court and voted against her three times. Think The New York Times or CNN find that newsworthy?